KEYCLOAK-17940 Client Policies Documentation (#1194)
keycloak/keycloak-documentation: server_admin/topics/clients/client-policies.adoc

[[_client_policies]]
=== Client Policies

To make it easy to secure client applications, it is beneficial to realize the following points in a unified way.

* Setting policies on what configuration a client can have
* Validation of client configurations
* Conformance to a required security standards and profiles such as Financial-grade API (FAPI)

To realize these points in a unified way, _Client Policies_ concept is introduced.

==== Use-cases

Client Policies realize the following points mentioned as follows.

Setting policies on what configuration a client can have::
    Configuration settings on the client can be enforced by client policies during client creation/update, but also during OpenID Connect requests to {project_name} server, which are related to particular client.
    {project_name} supports similar thing also through the Client Registration Policies described in the link:{adapterguide_link}#_client_registration_policies[{adapterguide_name}].
    However, Client Registration Policies can only cover OIDC Dynamic Client Registration. Client Policies cover not only what Client Registration Policies can do, but other client

>     registration and configuration ways. The current plans are for Client Registration to be replace by Client Policies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    registration and configuration ways. The current plans are for Client Registration to be replaced by Client Policies.
```

    OIDC authorization requests with scope `fapi-example-scope` need to be FAPI compliant.

Client Role::
    Applies for clients with the client role of the specified name

Client Domain Name, Host or IP Address::
    Applied for specific domain names of client. Or for the cases when the administrator registers/updates client from particular Host or IP Address.

Any Client::
    This condition always evaluates to true. It can be used for example to ensure that all clients in the particular realm are FAPI compliant.

===== Executor

An executor specifies what action is executed on a client to which a policy is adopted. The executor executes one or several specified actions. For example,
some executor checks whether the value of the parameter `redirect_uri` in the authorization request matches exactly with one of the pre-registered redirect URIs on
Authorization Endpoint and rejects this request if not.

The executor can not be used solely by itself. It can be used in a <<_client_policy_profile,profile>> that is described afterwards.

An executor can be configurable the same as other configurable providers. What can be configured depends on the nature of each executor.

> An executor acts on various events. An executor implementation can ignore certain types of events (For example executor for checking OIDC `request` object acts just

Reviewer 2: comma after For example

One of several purposes for this executor is to realize the security requirements of client conformance profiles like FAPI. To do so, the following executors are needed:

* Enforce secure <<_client-credentials,Client Authentication method>> is used for the client
* Enforce <<_mtls-client-certificate-bound-tokens,Holder-of-key tokens>> are used
* Enforce <<_proof-key-for-code-exchange,Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE)>> is used
* Enforce secure signature algorithm for <<_client-credentials,Signed JWT client authentication (private-key-jwt)>> is used
* Enforce HTTPS redirect URI and make sure that configured redirect URI does not contain wildcards
* Enforce OIDC `request` object satisfying high security level
* Enforce Response Type of OIDC Hybrid Flow including ID Token used as _detached signature_ as described in the FAPI 1 specification, which means that ID Token returned from Authorization response won't contain user profile data
* Enforce more secure `state` and `nonce` parameters treatment for preventing CSRF
* Enforce more secure signature algorithm when client registration

[[_client_policy_profile]]
===== Profile

> A profile consists of several executors, which can realize a security profile like FAPI. Profile can be configured by the Admin REST API (Admin Console) together with its executors.

Reviewer 2: use "which" when you are adding more information about the initial part of the sentence.
use "that" when you are qualifying the initial part of the sentence

I am not certain if it is "which" or "that" but this the guideline. Also, if you use which, precede with a comma.  If you use that, omit the comma.

Author: Thanks for this tip!

[[_client_policies]]
=== Client Policies

To make it easy to secure client applications, it is beneficial to realize the following points in a unified way.

* Setting policies on what configuration a client can have
* Validation of client configurations
* Conformance to a required security standards and profiles such as FAPI

To realize these points in a unified way, _Client Policies_ concept is introduced.

==== Use-cases

Client Policies realize the following points mentioned as follows.

Setting policies on what configuration a client can have::
    Configuration settings on the client can be enforced by client policies during client creation/update, but also during OpenID Connect requests to {project_name} server, which are related to particular client.
    The {project_name} supports similar thing also through the Client Registration Policies described in the link:{adapterguide_link}#_client_registration_policies[{adapterguide_name}].
    However, Client Registration Policies can only cover OIDC Dynamic Client Registration. Client Policies cover not only what Client Registration Policies can do, but other client

>     registration and configuration ways. In the future, Client Registration will be replaced by Client Policies in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    registration and configuration ways. In the future, Client Registration will be replaced by Client Policies.
```

Reviewer 2: This is worded in a way that we are making a commitment to what a future release will contain.  With changing priorities and people being overscheduled, is this definite?
How about "The current plans are for Client Registration to be replace by Client Policies."

Author: @vmuzikar I am changing this in a way, which @andymunro proposed. Thanks for the suggestions!

Validation of client configurations::

>     The {project_name} supports validation whether the client follows settings like Proof Key for Code Exchange,

Reviewer 2: Remove "The'

>     Request Object Signing Algorithm, Holder-of-Key Token, etc on some endpoints like Authorization Endpoint, Token Endpoint, etc.

Reviewer 2: Always replace "etc" (Latin) with "and so on" (English)

Author: Replacing "etc" here and on few other places in this document. Thanks for this suggestion!

>     These can be specified by each setting item (on Admin Console, switch, pulldown menu, etc). To make the client application secure, administrator needs to set

Reviewer 2: and so on.
secure, "the" administrator

>     lot of such settings in appropriate way, which makes it difficult for the administrator to secure their client application.

Reviewer 2: Change
lot of such settings in appropriate way
TO
many settings in the appropriate way
it is one administrator, so "their" should be "the"

    Client Policies can do these validation of client configurations mentioned just above and they can also be used to auto-configure some client configuration switches to meet
    the advanced security requirements. In the future, individual client configuration settings may be replaced by Client Policies directly performing required validations.

Conformance to a required security standards and profiles such as FAPI::
    The _Global client profiles_ are client profiles pre-configured in {project_name} by default. They are pre-configured to be compliant with standard security profiles like link:{adapterguide_link}#_fapi-support[FAPI],
    which makes it easy for the administrator to secure their client application to be compliant with the particular security profile. At this moment, {project_name} has global

>     profiles for the support of FAPI 1 specification. Administrator will just need to configure the client policies to specify which clients should

Reviewer 2: The administrator..

>     be compliant with the FAPI. Administrator can configure his own client profiles and client policies, so that {project_name} clients can be easily made compliant with various other

Reviewer 2: The administrator

Concerning "his" what if the administrator is a woman.  Remove "his own"

    security profiles like SPA, Native App, Open Banking etc.

==== Protocol

> The client policy concept is independent of any specific protocol. However, {project_name} currently supports it in fact just for the link:{adapterguide_link}#_oidc[OpenID Connect (OIDC) protocol].

Reviewer 2: change "it in fact" to "only"

==== Architecture

Client Policies consists of the four building blocks: Condition, Executor, Profile and Policy.

===== Condition

A condition determines to which client a policy is adopted and when it is adopted. Some conditions are checked at the time of client create/update when some other conditions are
checked during client requests (OIDC Authorization request, Token endpoint request etc). The condition checks whether one specified criteria is satisfied. For example,
some condition checks whether the access type of the client is confidential.

The condition can not be used solely by itself. It can be used in a <<_client_policy_policy,policy>> that is described afterwards.

> A condition has it's own SPI. Developers can implement their own condition by implementing the particular provider, however SPI is considered private and can change in the future.

Reviewer: Should we even mention the SPI if it's private?

Author: That is good point. I had an impression, that it may be useful to mention this. But on the other hand, we don't mention this for other SPIs as well. And "geek developers" will figure it anyway without mention in the docs :) So I am removing this.

> A condition has it's own SPI. Developers can implement their own condition by implementing the particular provider, however SPI is considered private and can change in the future.

Reviewer 2: Use "it's" to mean "it is"  -- here is should be "its"

Author: I've removed this sentence entirely as @vmuzikar suggested in one of his review comments above.

> A condition can be configurable the same as other configurable provider. What can be configured depends on each condition's nature.

Reviewer 2: providers

The following conditions are provided:

The way of creating/updating a client::
    * Dynamic Client Registration (Anonymous or Authenticated with Initial access token or Registration access token)

>     * Admin REST API (Admin Console, etc.)

Reviewer 2: and so on

So for example when creating a client, a condition can be configured to evaluate to true when this client is created by OIDC Dynamic Client Registration without initial
access token (Anonymous Dynamic Client Registration). So this condition can be used for example to ensure that all clients registered through OIDC Dynamic Client Registration
are FAPI compliant.

Author of a client (Checked by presence to the particular role or group)::
    On OpenID Connect dynamic client registration, an author of a client is the end user who was authenticated to get an access token for generating a new client, not Service
    Account of the existing client that actually accesses the registration endpoint with the access token. On registration by Admin REST API, an author of a client is the end user
    like administrator of the {project_name}.

Client Access Type (confidential, public, bearer-only)::
    For example when a client sends an authorization request, a policy is adopted if this client is confidential.

Client Scope::

>     Evaluates to true if client has particular client scope (either as default or as an optional scope used in current request). This can be used for example to ensure that

Reviewer 2: the client has a particular

    OIDC authorization requests with scope `fapi-example-scope` need to be FAPI compliant.

Client Role::
    Applies for clients with the client role of the specified name

Client Domain Name, Host or IP Address::
    Applied for specific domain names of client. Or for the cases when administrator registers/updates client from particular Host or IP Address.

Any Client::
    This condition always evaluates to true. It can be used for example to ensure that all clients in the particular realm are FAPI compliant.

===== Executor

An executor specifies what action is executed on a client to which a policy is adopted. The executor executes one or several specified actions. For example,
some executor checks whether the value of the parameter `redirect_uri` in the authorization request matches exactly with one of the pre-registered redirect URIs on
Authorization Endpoint and rejects this request if not.

The executor can not be used solely by itself. It can be used in a <<_client_policy_profile,profile>> that is described afterwards.

> An executor has it's own SPI. Developers can implement their own executor by implementing the particular provider, however SPI is considered private and can change in the future.

Reviewer: Should we even mention the SPI if it's private?

Author: Removing (See above).

> An executor has it's own SPI. Developers can implement their own executor by implementing the particular provider, however SPI is considered private and can change in the future.

Reviewer 2: its

An executor can be configurable the same as other configurable provider. What can be configured depends on the nature of each executor.

An executor acts on various events. An executor implementation can ignore certain types of events (For example executor for checking OIDC `request` object acts just
on the OIDC authorization request). Events are:

* Creating a client (including creation through dynamic client registration)
* Updating a client
* Sending an authorization request
* Sending a token request
* Sending a token refresh request
* Sending a token revocation request
* Sending a token introspection request
* Sending a userinfo request
* Sending a logout request with a refresh token

On each event, an executor can work in multiple phases. For example, on creating/updating a client, the executor can modify the client configuration by auto-configure specific client

> settings. After that, the executor validate this configuration in validation phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
settings. After that, the executor validates this configuration in validation phase.
```

> One of several purposes for this executor is to realize security requirements of client conformance profiles like FAPI. To do so, following executors are needed:

Reviewer 2: the security
the following

* Enforce secure <<_client-credentials,Client Authentication method>> is used for the client
* Enforce <<_mtls-client-certificate-bound-tokens,Holder-of-key tokens>> are used
* Enforce <<_proof-key-for-code-exchange,Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE)>> is used
* Enforce secure signature algorithm for <<_client-credentials,Signed JWT client authentication (private-key-jwt)>> is used
* Enforce HTTPS redirect URI and make sure that configured redirect URI does not contain wildcards
* Enforce OIDC `request` object satisfying high security level
* Enforce Response Type of OIDC Hybrid Flow including ID Token used as _detached signature_ as described in the FAPI 1 specification, which means that ID Token returned from Authorization response won't contain user profile data
* Enforce more secure `state` and `nonce` parameters treatment for preventing CSRF
* Enforce more secure signature algorithm when client registration

[[_client_policy_profile]]
===== Profile

> A profile consists of several executors which can realize a security profile like FAPI. Profile can be configured by the Admin REST API (admin console) together with it's executors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A profile consists of several executors which can realize a security profile like FAPI. Profile can be configured by the Admin REST API (Admin Console) together with its executors.
```

> A profile consists of several executors which can realize a security profile like FAPI. Profile can be configured by the Admin REST API (admin console) together with it's executors.

Reviewer 2: Always use a comma before which
Never use a comma before that

Author: Great suggestion, Thanks

> There are two _global profiles_ configured in the {project_name} by default with pre-configured executors compliant with the FAPI Baseline and FAPI Advanced specifications.

Reviewer 2: Two _global profiles_ exist and they are configured in {project_name}

> More details in the FAPI section of the link:{adapterguide_link}#_fapi-support[{adapterguide_name}].

Reviewer 2: More details exist in

[[_client_policy_policy]]
===== Policy

> A policy consists of several conditions and profiles. The policy can be adopted to clients satisfying any condition of this policy. The policy refers several profiles and all

Reviewer 3: IMO,
```
The policy can be adopted to clients satisfying any condition of this policy.
```
might be
```
The policy can be adopted to clients satisfying all conditions of this policy.
```

Author: @tnorimat Good catch. Thanks!

> executors of these profiles execute their task against the client that this policy is adopted.

Reviewer: Not sure but I think there’s something missing.
```suggestion
executors of these profiles execute their task against the client that this policy is adopted to.
```

==== Configuration

> Policies, profiles, conditions, executors can be configured by Admin REST API, which means also an admin console. To do so, there is a tab _Realm_ -> _Realm Settings_ -> _Client Policies_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Policies, profiles, conditions, executors can be configured by Admin REST API, which means also the Admin Console. To do so, there is a tab _Realm_ -> _Realm Settings_ -> _Client Policies_
```

> Policies, profiles, conditions, executors can be configured by Admin REST API, which means also an admin console. To do so, there is a tab _Realm_ -> _Realm Settings_ -> _Client Policies_

Reviewer 2: YES, always make "admin console" as "Admin Console"

, which means an administrator can have client policies per realm.

> The _Global Client Profiles_ are automatically available in each realm. However there are not client policies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _Global Client Profiles_ are automatically available in each realm. However there are no client policies
```

> configured by default. This means that administrator is always required to create any client policy if he wants for example the clients of his realm to be FAPI compliant. Global

Reviewer 2: "he wants?"  What if the administrator is a woman?
Try this "For example, if you want the clients of your realm to be FAPI compliant, a client policy is required"

> configured by default. This means that administrator is always required to create any client policy if he wants for example the clients of his realm to be FAPI compliant. Global
> profiles cannot be updated, but administrator can easily use them as a template and create his own profile if he wants to do some slight changes in the global profile configurations.

Reviewer: Not sure but I think we shouldn't imply that admins are only men. :)
```suggestion
configured by default. This means that administrator is always required to create any client policy if they want for example the clients of their realm to be FAPI compliant. Global
profiles cannot be updated, but administrator can easily use them as a template and create their own profile if they want to do some slight changes in the global profile configurations.
```

Author: Good point. I've changed whole sentence to plural then, so added also "administrators are always required" instead of "administrator is always required" etc.

> profiles cannot be updated, but administrator can easily use them as a template and create his own profile if he wants to do some slight changes in the global profile configurations.

Reviewer 2: Good edits, which I just saw, @vmuzikar.  Whatever works for you, @mposolda but be sure to always precede "administrator" with "the."

> There is JSON Editor available in the admin console, which simplifies the creation of new profile based on some global profile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is JSON Editor available in the Admin Console, which simplifies the creation of new profile based on some global profile.
```

==== Backward Compatibility

> Client Policies can take over Client Registration Policies described in the link:{adapterguide_link}#_client_registration_policies[{adapterguide_name}].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Client Policies can replace Client Registration Policies described in the link:{adapterguide_link}#_client_registration_policies[{adapterguide_name}].
```

> However, Client Registration Policies also still co-exist. This means that for example during Dynamic Client Registration request to create/update client, both client policies and

Reviewer 2: a Dynamic
a client

client registration policies are applied.

> In the future, Client Registration Policies feature will be removed and the existing client registration policies will be migrated into new client policies automatically.

Reviewer 2: Is it definitie?
How about "The current plans are for the Client Registration Policies feature to be removed and ..."

Author: I replaced with the formulation you proposed

    many settings in the appropriate way, which makes it difficult for the administrator to secure the client application.
    Client Policies can do these validation of client configurations mentioned just above and they can also be used to auto-configure some client configuration switches to meet
    the advanced security requirements. In the future, individual client configuration settings may be replaced by Client Policies directly performing required validations.

Conformance to a required security standards and profiles such as FAPI::
    The _Global client profiles_ are client profiles pre-configured in {project_name} by default. They are pre-configured to be compliant with standard security profiles like link:{adapterguide_link}#_fapi-support[FAPI],
    which makes it easy for the administrator to secure their client application to be compliant with the particular security profile. At this moment, {project_name} has global
    profiles for the support of FAPI 1 specification. The administrator will just need to configure the client policies to specify which clients should

>     be compliant with the FAPI. The administrators can configure their own client profiles and client policies, so that {project_name} clients can be easily made compliant with various other

Reviewer: I'm not sure we should use "administrators" (plural), or at least not mix it with singular. We now sometimes use "administrator" and sometimes "administrators". I think we can use singular together with "they" as a common "workaround" if we don't want to specify he/she. @andymunro Could you please confirm this?

Author: Changing to singular and removing "his own" as @andymunro proposed above https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-documentation/pull/1194#pullrequestreview-675651471

Two _global profiles_ exist and they are configured in {project_name} by default with pre-configured executors compliant with the FAPI Baseline and FAPI Advanced specifications.
More details exist in the FAPI section of the link:{adapterguide_link}#_fapi-support[{adapterguide_name}].

[[_client_policy_policy]]
===== Policy

A policy consists of several conditions and profiles. The policy can be adopted to clients satisfying all conditions of this policy. The policy refers several profiles and all
executors of these profiles execute their task against the client that this policy is adopted to.

==== Configuration

Policies, profiles, conditions, executors can be configured by Admin REST API, which means also the Admin Console. To do so, there is a tab _Realm_ -> _Realm Settings_ -> _Client Policies_
, which means the administrator can have client policies per realm.

The _Global Client Profiles_ are automatically available in each realm. However there are no client policies
configured by default. This means that the administrators are always required to create any client policy if they want for example the clients of his realm to be FAPI compliant. Global

> profiles cannot be updated, but the administrators can easily use them as a template and create their own profile if they want to do some slight changes in the global profile configurations.

Reviewer: "The administrators" (plural form) – please see comment above.

Author: Yes, changing the way you originally proposed as @andymunro confirmed to be fine https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-documentation/pull/1194#pullrequestreview-675664133
